Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger and in this part
of a series of foundational issues of mathematics
and in particular geometry we're going to look at
book 5 of Euclid which deals with proportions the
way the ancient Greeks thought about magnitude
is quite different from the way we moderns think
about and it's very instructive to see what
Euclid was up to to get a sense of alternate
ways of thinking about mathematical reality the
ancient Greeks thought about magnitude as being
the fundamental object of interest and the
magnitude was basically a geometrical object
and characterized by the fact that there was no
natural unit we moderns tend to think as number
is fundamental essentially in the algebraic
framework where there's a natural unit of the
number 1 the kinds of magnitudes that Euclid
was interested in were things like length and
area angle and volume and the ancient Greeks had
some basic assumptions about these magnitudes that
applied to any one of these situations first
of all they assumed that given two magnitudes
and I'll suppose we're talking about lengths to
be explicit but given any two magnitudes we can
always compare them and see whether they are
equal or whether a is less than B or whether
a is bigger than B so in this case here we
can see that this magnitude a is less than
this magnitude B another thing that we're always
allowed to do is to form multiples so if we're
given the magnitude C we are allowed to form the
multiple to C or three C or any integral multiple
of C that was done in the Euclid's framework
in terms of simple construction with the Euler
Thomas the third point is that it's generally
the proportions between magnitudes which is
more important than the magnitudes themselves so
given two magnitudes a and B Euclid was primarily
interested in the proportion between these two
magnitudes and this naturally leads to the idea
of commencer ability so the ancient Greeks said
that two magnitudes were commenced Irbil if we
can find a third magnitude such that both of the
original two were multiples of that third one so
for example if this is magnitude a and this is
magnitude B then if we take this little unit
to say the third magnitude then in terms of that
one a is seven of those and B is 11 all the same
and so we can say that the proportionate to B is
the proportion 7 to 11 and since we're allowed to
make that 3rd magnitude arbitrarily small its
natural very natural to suppose that any two
magnitudes are commencer well in this sense it
turns out that that's not true that was quite a
shock to the ancient Greeks so this whole theory
goes back to the pythagoreans the followers of
pythagoras and they had an elaborate theory of
how proportions between natural numbers could
explain many aspects of the modern world including
the motion of the heavens and the theory of music
so for example if you have two notes then they
are separated by what we call an octave if the
guitar strings that are used to generate them
are in the ratio two to one or the proportion
two to one so that's like dog dough from C to C a
perfect fifth is corresponding to the proportion
3 to 2 that's like don't assume Dora Mae Fah so
dough so that's a perfect fifth corresponds to
C Giano cap a perfect fourth in the ratio of four
to three that's from don't oof ah door a may fall
from C to F a minor seventh which goes from C to
B five is the composition of two perfect fourths
and they realized that in order to get that
proportion you just multiply this proportion
by itself so minor seventh is is the proportion
16 to 9 however there was a major difficulty with
this idea of proportions as being the basis for
everything and that was illustrated by the famous
discovery that he can take a square and you take
the diagonal of a square then the side and the
diagonal are not commenced erbl that's a famous
conundrum in mathematics and it leads to theory
of irrational numbers we now would say that a to
be is in the proportion 1 2 root 2 but the ancient
Greeks didn't have a theory of things like root
2 there's also another manifestation of this kind
of irrationality in what's known as the circle of
fifths if you go a perfect fifth up successively
then after 12 steps in our modern scale you get
back to where you started and that corresponds
to the fact that you could take 3 halves which is
the proportion corresponding to a perfect fifth
then raise it to the 12th power then you get
something pretty close to two to the seventh
which is about seven octaves but unfortunately to
the seventh is 128 which is a little bit different
from this one and so this discrepancy is the
source of a lot of subtle difficulty in the
theory of music that has been for the last few
thousands of years dealing with proportions that
are commensurate is relatively easy for example
if I have two magnitudes in their proportion
three to two and you have two magnitudes in the
proportion six to four we can easily decide that
these are proportions are actually the same
because 3 times 4 is equal to 2 times 6 so we
would say in modern terms that these two ratios
are the same in the abstract notation A to B is
equal to C to D precisely when a times D equals
B times C and we can also express inequalities
in the same framework if we have numbers a to
be as proportion is going to be less than the
portion c2d precisely when a times D is less than
B times C and similarly for great event but this
kind of arithmetic only works for commensurable
proportions because we're multiplying numbers
here the question that Euclid had to surmount
is what happens if we are just given general
proportions not necessarily commensurable ones
for example here is my proportionate to be here's
your proportion C to D how do we tell if these
proportions are the same if they're not the same
how do we tell which one is bigger that turns
out to be a subtle problem and it was solved by
Eudoxus and Euclid's book 5 essentially gives you
DOCSIS solution to this Eudoxus was a great genius
and this theory is really quite a remarkable
piece of work here is how he defined equality
between two proportions between magnitudes even
if those proportions were perhaps in commencer
he said that a to B equals C to D precisely when
for any numbers and I when I say number I mean
natural number like 1 2 3 4 for any numbers M and
n if M times a equals n times B then M times C
equals n times D and conversely so in other words
if three times this one equals two times this one
and these proportions are the same then it should
be the case that three times this equals two times
this on the other hand if three times this is
less than two times this then it should be the
case that three times this is less than two times
this and if three times this is bigger than two
times this then three times this should be also
bigger than two times this so we need all of these
conditions satisfied to conclude that a to B is
equal to C tough to D and these conditions have
to be satisfied for all m and n so it's a little
bit too complicated and there's a corresponding
definition for inequality of proportions as well
and you could have uses this framework to derive
various facts about proportions for example he
shows that if this proportion is the same as
this proportion then if we look at a to B plus
a that's a new proportion which will be equal
to the proportion C to keep us safe in our next
video we're going to talk about the remaining
books of Euclid from books 6 to book 13 I hope
you'll join me for that I'm Norman Wildberger